setup.md, before:

---
title: Setup
---

> ## GitHub account
>
> Get a [GitHub account](https://github.com/join) ([here](https://docs.github.com/en/github/setting-up-and-managing-your-github-user-account/deleting-your-user-account) are instructions on how to remove it later if you do not wish to keep it)
>
> As a new GitHub user, you might need to generate a personal access token to authenticate with GitHub from RStudio.
> Install RStudio and follow these steps:
>
> 1. Log in to your GitHub account.
> 2. Click on your profile icon in the top-right corner and select "Settings".
> 3. In the left sidebar, click on "Developer settings".
> 4. Click on "Personal access tokens".
> 5. Click on "Tokens (classic)".
> 6. Click on "Generate new token".
> 7. Give your token a descriptive name.
> 8. Select the scopes ("repo" is necessary for creating repositories), and set an appropriate expiration date.
> 9. Click "Generate token".
> 10. Copy the generated token and store it securely. Note: This token is sensitive and should be treated like a password. 
> 11. If needed, you can use this token as your password when you link your local git repository in RStudio with GitHub.
{: .prereq}

> ## Git
>
> Install Git for [Windows](https://gitforwindows.org/), [macOS](https://git-scm.com/download/mac), or [Linux](https://git-scm.com/download/linux)\
> Optional: [Quickly get started with common tasks on GitHub](https://help.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/quickstart)
{: .prereq}

> ## RStudio Desktop
>
> Install latest version of RStudio Desktop for [Windows](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/), [macOS](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/), or [Linux](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/)
{: .prereq}

> ## Presentation
>
> Slides for this module are available [here](module-versioning-dm-practice.pdf)
{: .prereq}

{% include links.md %}

Commit message:

Missing precourse instructions on RStudio git conf

setup.md, after:

---
title: Setup
---

> ## GitHub account
>
> Get a [GitHub account](https://github.com/join) ([here](https://docs.github.com/en/github/setting-up-and-managing-your-github-user-account/deleting-your-user-account) are instructions on how to remove it later if you do not wish to keep it)
>
> As a new GitHub user, you might need to generate a personal access token to authenticate with GitHub from RStudio.
> Install RStudio and follow these steps:
>
> 1. Log in to your GitHub account.
> 2. Click on your profile icon in the top-right corner and select "Settings".
> 3. In the left sidebar, click on "Developer settings".
> 4. Click on "Personal access tokens".
> 5. Click on "Tokens (classic)".
> 6. Click on "Generate new token".
> 7. Give your token a descriptive name.
> 8. Select the scopes ("repo" is necessary for creating repositories), and set an appropriate expiration date.
> 9. Click "Generate token".
> 10. Copy the generated token and store it securely. Note: This token is sensitive and should be treated like a password. 
> 11. If needed, you can use this token as your password when you link your local git repository in RStudio with GitHub.
{: .prereq}

> ## Git
>
> Install Git for [Windows](https://gitforwindows.org/), [macOS](https://git-scm.com/download/mac), or [Linux](https://git-scm.com/download/linux)\
> Optional: [Quickly get started with common tasks on GitHub](https://help.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/quickstart)
> 
{: .prereq}

> ### GitHub Desktop
> A tool that allows you to interact with Git repositories stored on your own computer and on the 
> GitHub cloud platform using an intuitive graphical user interface.
> 
> * Install by following the instructions at: <https://docs.github.com/en/desktop/installing-and-configuring-github-desktop/installing-github-desktop>
> 
{: .prereq}

> ## RStudio Desktop
>
> Install latest version of RStudio Desktop for [Windows](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/), [macOS](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/), or [Linux](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/)
{: .prereq}

> ## Presentation
>
> Slides for this module are available [here](module-versioning-dm-practice.pdf)
{: .prereq}

{% include links.md %}
