_episodes/01.md, before:

---
title: "Version control systems"
teaching: 20
exercises: 10
objectives:
- Get a mental representation of version control and its benefits.
- Understand the difference between Git and GitHub.
keypoints:
- Use a version control system to manage snapshots of your data, scripts, documents,
  manuscripts and more!
- Creating snapshots allow you to go back to the same version as was published, shared
  with a collaborator or used in an analysis
- Keeping a record of changes allows you track down problems and selectively undo/redo
questions:
- How not to worry about making changes to a project?
- What is version control?
- What is Git and GitHub?
---

> ### Introduction to the lesson
> This tutorial provides a brief but hands-on introduction to the concept of version control, Git in RStudio, and
> GitHub. Git is a version control system which allows files and data to be tracked and synchronized,
> which allows collaboration and reproducibility.
> GitHub is a popular website that stores Git repositories.
>
> **This tutorial avoids using the command line.** Instead, we will practice the basics of Git using Git in RStudio. Later on we will also introduce GitHub and show an example of the synchronization between the local git repository and the remote GitHub repository. In many cases, this is enough. Git in Rstudio and GitHub provide collaboration tools to all kinds of projects, and there are all kinds of good ways to use it.
>
> This tutorial serves as an introduction to version control and Git. After this lesson, you will both be able to use Git, and feel much more confident taking a command-line Git course such as [CodeRefinery’s git-intro course](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-intro/).
>
> What we will not cover
> * Command line interface
> * Cloning using SSH protocol and SSH keys
> * Rebasing and squashing
> * Many Git tricks which can be explored later
{: .callout}

> ## Why GitHub?
>
> We will do an exercise on [GitHub](https://github.com) but also
> [GitLab](https://gitlab.com) and [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org) allow
> similar workflows and basically everything that we will discuss is transferable. With
> this material and these exercises we do not endorse the company
> [GitHub](https://github.com). We have chosen to demonstrate a number of
> concepts using examples with [GitHub](https://github.com) because it is
> currently the most popular web platform for hosting Git repositories and the chance is high
> that you will interact with [GitHub](https://github.com)-based repositories even if you
> choose to host your Git repository on another platform.
>
> We also encourage course participants to use CodeRefinery’s [Nordic research software repository platform](https://source.coderefinery.org),
> for more information see [https://coderefinery.org/repository/](https://coderefinery.org/repository/).
{: .solution}

## Version control in general

![Figure 1. Versioning Hell](../fig/basics/ew-versions.png)  
*"Piled Higher and Deeper" by Jorge Cham (http://phdcomics.com/)*

> ## Exercise 1: Problems with change (5 min)
>
> Which of these issues can you relate to?
> 
> * I have eight versions of this file - which one do I use?
> * I can’t remake this figure from last year - I don't remember how I did it
> * I slightly modified my code in one place, everything stopped working
> * I have several copies of the same directory because I'm worried about breaking something
> * Somebody added erroneous records in a shared file with samples, cannot find who and why
> * You remember seeing a data file but cannot find it anymore: is it deleted? Moved away?
> * I tried multiple analyses and I don't remember which one I chose to generate my output data
> * I have to merge changes to our manuscript from 10 different emails with collaborators
> * I accidentally deleted a part of my work
> * I came to an old project and forgot where I left/saved it
> * I reorganized my data files, but broke the analysis pipeline and don't know how to fix it
> * I have trouble to find the source of a mistake in an experiment
> * My directory is polluted with a lot of unused/temporary/old folders because I'm afraid of losing something important
> * I made a lot of changes to my paper but want to bring back one paragraph
{: .challenge}

## Version Control Systems
(13 min teaching) [fair-bio-practice](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/fair-bio-practice/11-version-control/index.html#how-version-control-systems-work)

> ## How Version Control Systems Work
> 
> A version control system is a tool that keeps track of file changes for us and helps us version and merge our files. 
> It allows you to decide which changes make up the next version, called a commit, and keeps useful metadata about them. 
> The complete history of commits for a particular project and their metadata make up a repository. 
>
> A version control system stores snapshots of a project's files in a
> repository. Users modify their working copy of the project and then
> save changes to the repository when they wish to make a permanent record
> and/or share their work with colleagues. The version control system
> automatically records when the change was made and by whom along with
> the changes themselves.
>
> Repositories can be kept in sync across different computers facilitating collaboration among different people.
>
> Crucially, if several people have edited files simultaneously, the
> version control system will detect the collision and require them to
> resolve any conflicts. 
{: .callout}

Tool-based version control has several benefits over manual version
control:

* Instead of requiring users to backup copies of the whole
project, version control safely stores just enough information to
allow old versions of files to be re-created on demand.

* Instead of relying on users to choose sensible names for backup
copies the version control system timestamps all saved changes
automatically.

* Instead of requiring users to be disciplined about completing the
changelog version control systems prompt them every time a change
is saved. They also keep a 100% accurate record of what was
*actually* changed, as opposed to what the user *thought* they
changed, which can be invaluable when problems crop up later.

* Instead of simply copying files to remote storage, version control
checks to see whether doing that would overwrite anyone's work.
If so, they identify conflicts and merge changes.

Simplifying Git is a local program (like Word) that runs on your machine and knows how to track changes.
Github is an online system that can communicate with Git and propagate your changes to other computers 
(like OneDrive can do for Word documents).

Keeping track of changes that you or your collaborators make to data and
software is a critical part of research. Being able to reference or
retrieve a specific version of the entire project aids in
reproducibility for you leading up to publication, when responding to
reviewer comments, and when providing supporting information for
reviewers, editors, and readers.

> ## Exercise 2: Using Version Control System (5 min)
>
> Five reasons to use a version control system in research
> * Tell the story: The history of your commit messages will describe your project progress.
> * Travel back in time: a version control system makes it easy to compare different time points of your project smoothly. If you want to compare the stage of your project a year ago from now, it only takes one command-line of code.
> * Experiment with changes: if you want to make changes in a script you can first make a “snapshot” of the project status before experimenting with changes.
> * Backup your work: by being able to link your local repository (folder) to a distant online host (GitHub), a version control system backs up your precious work instantly.
> * Collaborate easily on projects: having a web-hosted synchronised version of your project will encourage collaboration with other researchers. Think about a colleague of yours being able to add a script to make a figure for your publication for instance.
> The repository will track their contribution and evidence their participation in the project.
>
> Which two are the most important for you.
>
{: .challenge}

> ## Version Control System and FAIR
> Looking at the reasons to use a version control system in research, 
> how does using version control system help in being FAIR?
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> *   Online respository is a Findable and Accessible resource (also Trackable).
>> *   Online repositories are also interoperable since they can be accessed from anywhere (with internet) and are not restricted to your local hard drive.
>> *   The 'telling story' and being able to travel back in time helps in reuse and reproducibility.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

---

## Extra Material

### Commits, branches, repositories, forks, clones

- **repository**: The project, contains all data and history (commits, branches, tags).
- **commit**: Snapshot of the project, gets a unique identifier (e.g. `c7f0e8bfc718be04525847fc7ac237f470add76e`).
- **branch**: Independent development line, often we call the main development line `main`.
- **tag**: A pointer to one commit, to be able to refer to it later. Like a sticky note that you attach to a particular commit (e.g. `phd-printed` or `paper-submitted`).
- **cloning**: Copying the whole repository to your laptop - the first time. It is not necessary to download each file one by one.
- **forking**: Taking a copy of a repository (which is typically not yours) - your
  copy (fork) stays on GitHub and you can make changes to your copy.

![fig](../fig/basics/file-view.png)

GitHub file view of the
[nf-core/viralrecon](https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon/)
repository.  This is the version of all files at a single point in
time.

![fig](../fig/basics/history-demo.png)

Github history view of the
[viralrecon](https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon/commits/master)
repository.  This is the progression of the repository (with the
**commit message** over time).

![fig](../fig/basics/commits-and-branches.png)

Network graph of all commits in the
[nf-core/viralrecon](https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon/network)
repository.  This shows the relationship between different **forks**
of people who are contributing and sharing code.

### Interesting repositories to explore these concepts

- Assembly and intrahost/low-frequency variant calling for viral samples
  - Repository: <https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon/>
  - Commits, branches, forks: <https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon//network>
- Swedish COVID-19 data portal
  - Repository: <https://github.com/ScilifelabDataCentre/covid-portal>
  - Commits, branches, forks: <https://github.com/ScilifelabDataCentre/covid-portal/network>
- [Activity inequality study](http://activityinequality.stanford.edu/)
  - Contains data and code necessary to create figures from their article.
  - Data: <https://github.com/timalthoff/activityinequality/tree/master/data>
- FiveThirtyEight story [Why We’re Sharing 3 Million Russian Troll Tweets](https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/why-were-sharing-3-million-russian-troll-tweets/)
  - Contains data and readme file, no code.
  - Data: <https://github.com/fivethirtyeight/russian-troll-tweets>
- The NY Times Coronavirus (Covid-19) Data in the United States
  - Contains data, readme, license, but no code.  As of 2020 April,
    being updated every day.
  - Data: <https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data>
  - Website: <https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-us-cases.html>
- CSV exports of the Getty Provenance Index
  - Data: <https://github.com/thegetty/provenance-index-csv>
- Entire books are written using Git/GitHub:
  - <https://github.com/rust-lang/book>
  - <https://github.com/ropensci/dev_guide>
  - <https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way>
- Papers under open review:
  - <https://github.com/openjournals/joss-reviews/issues>

> ## Why using repositories?
>
> - All changes are recorded.
> - We do not have to send changes via email.
> - We can experiment with several ideas which might not work out (using branches).
> - Several people can work on the same project at the same time (using branches).
> - We do not have to wait for others to send us "the latest version" over email.
> - We do not have to merge parallel developments by hand.
> - Group-based access model where shared access is the default, instead of
>   everything fundamentally owned by individuals who manage sharing as-needed:
>   with Git you can easily have collaboration be the default.
> - It is possible to serve websites directly from a repository.
{: .callout}

> ## Discussion
>
> - How have you solved these in the past without version control?
{: .discussion}

Commit message:

tutorial of local versioning with Git in RStudio in 03.md. First draft. Might need polishing. Added image for "New Project" in R.

_episodes/01.md, after:

---
title: "Version control systems"
teaching: 20
exercises: 10
objectives:
- Get a mental representation of version control and its benefits.
- Understand the difference between Git and GitHub.
keypoints:
- Use a version control system to manage snapshots of your data, scripts, documents,
  manuscripts and more!
- Creating snapshots allow you to go back to the same version as was published, shared
  with a collaborator or used in an analysis
- Keeping a record of changes allows you track down problems and selectively undo/redo
questions:
- How not to worry about making changes to a project?
- What is version control?
- What is Git and GitHub?
---

> ### Introduction to the lesson
> This tutorial provides a brief but hands-on introduction to the concept of version control, Git in RStudio, and
> GitHub. Git is a command-line based version control system which allows files and data to be tracked and synchronized,
> which allows collaboration and reproducibility.
> GitHub is a popular website that stores Git repositories.
>
> **This tutorial avoids using the command line.** Instead, we will practice the basics of Git using Git in RStudio. Later on we will also introduce GitHub and show an example of the synchronization between the local git repository and the remote GitHub repository. In many cases, this is enough. Git in Rstudio and GitHub provide collaboration tools to all kinds of projects, and there are all kinds of good ways to use it.
>
> This tutorial serves as an introduction to version control and Git. After this lesson, you will both be able to use Git, and feel much more confident taking a command-line Git course such as [CodeRefinery’s git-intro course](https://coderefinery.github.io/git-intro/).
>
> What we will not cover
> * Command line interface
> * Cloning using SSH protocol and SSH keys
> * Rebasing and squashing
> * Many Git tricks which can be explored later
{: .callout}

> ## Why GitHub?
>
> We will do an exercise on [GitHub](https://github.com) but also
> [GitLab](https://gitlab.com) and [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org) allow
> similar workflows and basically everything that we will discuss is transferable. With
> this material and these exercises we do not endorse the company
> [GitHub](https://github.com). We have chosen to demonstrate a number of
> concepts using examples with [GitHub](https://github.com) because it is
> currently the most popular web platform for hosting Git repositories and the chance is high
> that you will interact with [GitHub](https://github.com)-based repositories even if you
> choose to host your Git repository on another platform.
>
> We also encourage course participants to use CodeRefinery’s [Nordic research software repository platform](https://source.coderefinery.org),
> for more information see [https://coderefinery.org/repository/](https://coderefinery.org/repository/).
{: .solution}

## Version control in general

![Figure 1. Versioning Hell](../fig/basics/ew-versions.png)  
*"Piled Higher and Deeper" by Jorge Cham (http://phdcomics.com/)*

> ## Exercise 1: Problems with change (5 min)
>
> Let us start with a small excercise to get you activated. Which of these issues can you relate to?
> 
> * I have eight versions of this file - which one do I use?
> * I can’t remake this figure from last year - I don't remember how I did it
> * I slightly modified my code in one place, everything stopped working
> * I have several copies of the same directory because I'm worried about breaking something
> * Somebody added erroneous records in a shared file with samples, cannot find who and why
> * You remember seeing a data file but cannot find it anymore: is it deleted? Moved away?
> * I tried multiple analyses and I don't remember which one I chose to generate my output data
> * I have to merge changes to our manuscript from 10 different emails with collaborators
> * I accidentally deleted a part of my work
> * I came to an old project and forgot where I left/saved it
> * I reorganized my data files, but broke the analysis pipeline and don't know how to fix it
> * I have trouble to find the source of a mistake in an experiment
> * My directory is polluted with a lot of unused/temporary/old folders because I'm afraid of losing something important
> * I made a lot of changes to my paper but want to bring back one paragraph
{: .challenge}

## Version Control Systems
(13 min teaching) [fair-bio-practice](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/fair-bio-practice/11-version-control/index.html#how-version-control-systems-work)

> ## How Version Control Systems Work
> 
> A version control system is a tool that keeps track of file changes for us and helps us version and merge our files. 
> It allows you to decide which changes make up the next version, called a commit, and keeps useful metadata about them. 
> The complete history of commits for a particular project and their metadata make up a repository. 
>
> A version control system stores snapshots of a project's files in a
> repository. Users modify their working copy of the project and then
> save changes to the repository when they wish to make a permanent record
> and/or share their work with colleagues. The version control system
> automatically records when the change was made and by whom along with
> the changes themselves.
>
> Repositories can be kept in sync across different computers facilitating collaboration among different people.
>
> Crucially, if several people have edited files simultaneously, the
> version control system will detect the collision and require them to
> resolve any conflicts. 
{: .callout}

Tool-based version control has several benefits over manual version
control:

* Instead of requiring users to backup copies of the whole
project, version control safely stores just enough information to
allow old versions of files to be re-created on demand.

* Instead of relying on users to choose sensible names for backup
copies the version control system timestamps all saved changes
automatically.

* Instead of requiring users to be disciplined about completing the
changelog version control systems prompt them every time a change
is saved. They also keep a 100% accurate record of what was
*actually* changed, as opposed to what the user *thought* they
changed, which can be invaluable when problems crop up later.

* Instead of simply copying files to remote storage, version control
checks to see whether doing that would overwrite anyone's work.
If so, they identify conflicts and merge changes.

Simplifying Git is a local program (like Word) that runs on your machine and knows how to track changes.
Github is an online system that can communicate with Git and propagate your changes to other computers 
(like OneDrive can do for Word documents).

Keeping track of changes that you or your collaborators make to data and
software is a critical part of research. Being able to reference or
retrieve a specific version of the entire project aids in
reproducibility for you leading up to publication, when responding to
reviewer comments, and when providing supporting information for
reviewers, editors, and readers.

> ## Exercise 2: Using Version Control System (5 min)
>
> Five reasons to use a version control system in research
> * Tell the story: The history of your commit messages will describe your project progress.
> * Travel back in time: a version control system makes it easy to compare different time points of your project smoothly. If you want to compare the stage of your project a year ago from now, it only takes one command-line of code.
> * Experiment with changes: if you want to make changes in a script you can first make a “snapshot” of the project status before experimenting with changes.
> * Backup your work: by being able to link your local repository (folder) to a distant online host (GitHub), a version control system backs up your precious work instantly.
> * Collaborate easily on projects: having a web-hosted synchronised version of your project will encourage collaboration with other researchers. Think about a colleague of yours being able to add a script to make a figure for your publication for instance.
> The repository will track their contribution and evidence their participation in the project.
>
> Which two are the most important for you.
>
{: .challenge}

> ## Version Control System and FAIR
> Looking at the reasons to use a version control system in research, 
> how does using version control system help in being FAIR?
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> *   Online respository is a Findable and Accessible resource (also Trackable).
>> *   Online repositories are also interoperable since they can be accessed from anywhere (with internet) and are not restricted to your local hard drive.
>> *   The 'telling story' and being able to travel back in time helps in reuse and reproducibility.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

---

## Extra Material

### Commits, branches, repositories, forks, clones

- **repository**: The project, contains all data and history (commits, branches, tags).
- **commit**: Snapshot of the project, gets a unique identifier (e.g. `c7f0e8bfc718be04525847fc7ac237f470add76e`).
- **branch**: Independent development line, often we call the main development line `main`.
- **tag**: A pointer to one commit, to be able to refer to it later. Like a sticky note that you attach to a particular commit (e.g. `phd-printed` or `paper-submitted`).
- **cloning**: Copying the whole repository to your laptop - the first time. It is not necessary to download each file one by one.
- **forking**: Taking a copy of a repository (which is typically not yours) - your
  copy (fork) stays on GitHub and you can make changes to your copy.

![fig](../fig/basics/file-view.png)

GitHub file view of the
[nf-core/viralrecon](https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon/)
repository.  This is the version of all files at a single point in
time.

![fig](../fig/basics/history-demo.png)

Github history view of the
[viralrecon](https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon/commits/master)
repository.  This is the progression of the repository (with the
**commit message** over time).

![fig](../fig/basics/commits-and-branches.png)

Network graph of all commits in the
[nf-core/viralrecon](https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon/network)
repository.  This shows the relationship between different **forks**
of people who are contributing and sharing code.

### Interesting repositories to explore these concepts

- Assembly and intrahost/low-frequency variant calling for viral samples
  - Repository: <https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon/>
  - Commits, branches, forks: <https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon//network>
- Swedish COVID-19 data portal
  - Repository: <https://github.com/ScilifelabDataCentre/covid-portal>
  - Commits, branches, forks: <https://github.com/ScilifelabDataCentre/covid-portal/network>
- [Activity inequality study](http://activityinequality.stanford.edu/)
  - Contains data and code necessary to create figures from their article.
  - Data: <https://github.com/timalthoff/activityinequality/tree/master/data>
- FiveThirtyEight story [Why We’re Sharing 3 Million Russian Troll Tweets](https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/why-were-sharing-3-million-russian-troll-tweets/)
  - Contains data and readme file, no code.
  - Data: <https://github.com/fivethirtyeight/russian-troll-tweets>
- The NY Times Coronavirus (Covid-19) Data in the United States
  - Contains data, readme, license, but no code.  As of 2020 April,
    being updated every day.
  - Data: <https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data>
  - Website: <https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-us-cases.html>
- CSV exports of the Getty Provenance Index
  - Data: <https://github.com/thegetty/provenance-index-csv>
- Entire books are written using Git/GitHub:
  - <https://github.com/rust-lang/book>
  - <https://github.com/ropensci/dev_guide>
  - <https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way>
- Papers under open review:
  - <https://github.com/openjournals/joss-reviews/issues>

> ## Why using repositories?
>
> - All changes are recorded.
> - We do not have to send changes via email.
> - We can experiment with several ideas which might not work out (using branches).
> - Several people can work on the same project at the same time (using branches).
> - We do not have to wait for others to send us "the latest version" over email.
> - We do not have to merge parallel developments by hand.
> - Group-based access model where shared access is the default, instead of
>   everything fundamentally owned by individuals who manage sharing as-needed:
>   with Git you can easily have collaboration be the default.
> - It is possible to serve websites directly from a repository.
{: .callout}

> ## Discussion
>
> - How have you solved these in the past without version control?
{: .discussion}
